>> There are two issues
that come within the realm
of what's called the mystery.
One is suffering.
And one is death.
Because people say, if
all this is so benevolent,
why is there suffering?
So I listen to the
Buddha's Noble Truths.
The first one is
there is suffering.
The second one is the cause
of it is the clinging.
The third is let go of
the clinging of mind,
you let go of suffering.
Fourth is the eightfold
path, how to do that.
And I realize, that has
to do with my suffering,
that I can get to
the point where I
can work with my own suffering.
I don't ask for suffering.
But when it comes
along, I see it
as a clue to me of where
the clinging of my mind is.
And since I want to get free,
that suffering at that point
literally becomes grace,
because it is something
that will help me get free.
But as you and I both in
our human hearts know,
when somebody comes up to you
and says they're starving,
it's a pretty empty thing
to say, that's grace, baby.
In other words, you
can know something
about how you work
with suffering,
and at the same
moment their suffering
is breaking your heart.
So you're left with the
mystery, is suffering grace
or is it an error?
Or is it wrong or is it right?
Do people use it or don't they?
Like, my guru said to me,
God comes to the hungry
in the form of food.
Now, I was on benefits
at many peace rallies.
And I'm always amazed at
how angry everybody is.
And they're all
busy being peaceful,
but what they're conveying
is something that isn't
creating peace in the universe.
And the question is, can they
protest against injustice,
and in war, and
nuclear proliferation,
and all that
without being angry?
And can they do it and be
peaceful at the same moment?
And that has to do, it seems
to me, with whether or not
you can live on more than
one plane of consciousness
simultaneously.
I was upset about
Bangladesh at one point.
I wanted to take my
Volkswagen over there.
My guru didn't tell me whether
to do it or not to do it.
He said to me, Ram Dass, don't
you see it's all perfect?
And that was like a red
flag in front of a bull.
What do you mean
it's all perfect?
It stinks.
And it's getting worse.
And he'd go, don't you
see it's all perfect?
Now, he didn't mean it's
all perfect, so do nothing.
Human can you simultaneously
not judge God and still
deal with suffering?
Because in the judging, you
say, there is an error here.
And you don't even know
whether there is or not.
My rational mind cannot
understand the meta system
in which good, evil, and
death, and all that stuff are.
It is at the realm of mystery.
The question is, how you
respond to the mystery?
Do you assume mystery is dark?
Or do you assume it's not?
Now, what I experience is
that, as I go to Guatemala
and look at a Mayan
woman who has lost
her children in violence, and
she's standing right here,
and we look into
one another's eyes,
and I see such beauty
and such suffering,
at the level that I'm part
of the Seva Foundation,
I will do what I can to
relieve her physical suffering.
But if I am just part of the
Seva Foundation giving food
to her because she is hungry or
to her child, that's wonderful.
And it's fine.
But what I am also doing
at that same moment
is I am reinforcing the whole
world in which suffering
exists.
And it's those two
planes that allow
me to look at
suffering with wonder
and then allow my human heart
to keep breaking and do what
I can to end it,
because there are
different levels of the heart.
There is the emotional,
psychological, personal,
you as a separate
entity that says,
if I was starving on the streets
of Calcutta, or in Somalia,
or wherever I am, it
would hurt like hell.
And I want to get
rid of it, that pain.
I want to get rid of pain.
And then you're overwhelmed,
because there is so much of it,
you can't get rid of it.
And so you go into a depression.
And does that help the pain?
Does that help anybody's pain?
That's an interesting question.
If you're really
compassionate and you
want to relieve
suffering, you've
got to do what Gandhi
said, which he said,
my life is my message.
And your message has
to be one of the hand
reaching out to
relieve the suffering,
and at the same moment, the
faith, and the equanimity,
and the joy of the universe.
And that's the
balancing act that
allows you to look at
suffering and then hear out
of the gestalt of all
the suffering, and you,
and your skills, and your
opportunities, and all of it,
what is going to
be your next act?
And trust the intuitive
heart to define the next act.
And the next act
might be sitting here.
Or it might be getting up and
walking out and finding food
to feed to somebody homeless.
And it's no better or worse.
And you've just got
to hear what you've
got to do with this moment
to get that balance together.
And finally, your
compassion to other people
forces you to work on yourself,
is what it boils down to.
And you have this relationship
where you work on yourself
as an offering to others.
And the way I do it now is
I work with others as a way
to work on myself.